Welcome. I'm Bob Sedgewick, professor of
computer science at Princeton. This is our
online course Algorithms developed by
myself and Kevin Wayne here at Princeton.
We're gonna start with an overview
discussion of why you might want to study
algorithms and a little bit of discussion
about the resources that you need to take
this course. So, what is this course? It's
an intermediate level survey course on
algorithms. We're going to concentrate on
programming and problem solving in the
context of real applications, and our
focus is going to be on two things,
Algorithms which are methods for solving
problems and data structures which store
the information associated in problem,
with a problem and go hand in hand with
algorithms. These are the basic topics
that we'll cover in part one and part two
of the course. The first part is data type
sorting and searching. We'll consider a
number of data structures and algorithms
that are basic to all the methods we
consider including stacks, queues, bags
and priority queues. Then we'll consider
classic algorithms for sorting, putting
things in order. That's quicksort,
mergesort, heapsort and radix sorts. And
we'll consider classic methods for
searching. Including binary search trees,
red-black binary search trees and hash
tables. The second part of the course is
for more advanced algorithms including
graph algorithms, classic graph searching
algorithms, minimum spanning tree and
shortest path algorithms, algorithms for
processing strings including regular
expressions and data compression. And then
some advanced algorithms that make use of
the basic algorithms that we developed
earlier in the course. So, why should one
study algorithms? Well, their input,
impact is very broad and far-reaching.
From the internet to biology to,
commercial computing, computer graphics,
security, multimedia, social networks, and
scientific applications, algorithms are
all around us. They're used for movies and
video games, for particle collision
simulation, they're used to study the
genome, and all manner of other
applications. So, that's one important
reason to study algorithms, their impact
is broad and far-reaching. Algorithms are
also interesting to study, because they,
they have ancient roots. Now the first
algorithm we studied goes back to 300
B.C., dating at least to Euclid. The
concept of an algorithm was formalized
actually here at Princeton, by Church and
Turing, in the 1930s. But most algorithms
that we consider, were discovered in
recent decades. In fact, some were
discovered by undergraduates in a course,
course like this. And there's plenty of
other algorithms waiting to be discovered
by students like you. The main reason that
people study algorithms, is to be able to
solve problems that it could not otherwise
be addressed. For example, in the first
lecture, we're going to talk about the
network connectivity problem, where the
problem is, given a large set of items
that are connected together pairwise is
there a way to get from one to another
with a path through the connections. As
you can see from this example, it's not
clear whether or not there's such a path,
we need a computer program to do it, in
fact, we need an efficient algorithm to do
it. In this case the answer is that there
is such a path. Another reason to study
algorithms is for intellectual
stimulation. Algorithms are very
interesting objects to study. Don Knuth
who wrote several books on, on algorithms
and was a pioneer in the field said that,
"An algorithm must be seen to be
believed." You can't just think about an
algorithm you have to work with it.
Another quote from Francis Sullivan, says,
"The great algorithms are the poetry of
computation." Just like verse, they can be
terse, elusive, dense, and even
mysterious. But once unlocked, they cast a
brilliant new light on some aspect of
computing. Algorithms are interesting for
intellectual stimulation. Another reason
many people study algorithms and I suspect
many of you, is it's necessary to
understand good algorithms, efficient
algorithms, a good data structures in
order to be a proficient programmer. Linus
Torvalds, who created lin, Linux, says
that the difference between a bad
programmer and a good one is whether he
considers his code or his data structures
more important. Bad programmers worry
about the code, good programmers worry
about data structures, and their
relationships. And, I might add, the
algorithms that process them. Niklaus
Wirth, another pioneer in computer
science, wrote a famous book called
Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs.
[cough]. Another reason nowadays to study
algorithms is that, they have become a
common language for understanding, nature.
Algorithms are computational models, and
algorithmic models are replacing
mathematical models in scientific inquiry.
In the twentieth century, math, scientists
developed mathematical models to try to
understand natural phenomenon. It soon
became clear that those mathematical
models were difficult to solve. It was
difficult to create solutions, to be able
to test hypotheses against natural
phenomenon. So, more and more and more now
a days people are developing computational
models, where they attempt to simulate
what might be happening in nature in order
to try to better understand it. Algorithms
play an extremely important role in this
process. And we'll see some examples of
this in this course. Another important
reason is that if you know effect, how to
effectively use algorithms and data
structures you're going to have a much
better chance at interviewing for a job in
the technology industry then if you don't.
So, here's a bunch of reasons that I just
went through for studying algorithms.
Their impact's broad and far-reaching,
they have old roots and present new
opportunities, they allow us to solve
problems that could not otherwise be
addressed, you can use them for
intellectual stimulation to become a
proficient programmer. They might unlock
the secrets of life in the universe, and
they're good for fun and profit. In fact,
a pr ogrammer might ask, why study
anything else? Well, there's plenty of
good reasons to study other things, but
I'll submit there's no good reason not to
study algorithims. [cough] So, for this
course we have two resources that I want
to talk about and make sure that people
are familiar with before entering into the
content. This is a publishing model that
Kevin Wayne and I developed and have been
using for many years, and we think it's a
very effective way to support the, kinds
of lectures that we're going to be giving
in this course. Down at the bottom, and
it's optional for this course, we have a
text book. It's a traditional, text book
that extensively covers the topics in the
course, in fact many more topics than we
can present in lecture. And then
supporting that textbook, is free online
material that we call the book site. You
can go to books, the book site to see the
lecture slides. But more important,
there's code, there's exercises, tere's a
great deal of information there. In fact,
maybe ten times what's in the book,
including a summary of the content. So,
during this course you'll be referring to
the book site frequently while working
online. People often ask about
prerequisites. We're assuming that people
who take this course know how to program,
and know the basics of loops, arrays,
functions. They have some exposure to
object oriented programming and recursion.
We use the Java language, but we don't
dwell on details of Java, we mostly use it
as an expository language. We do some
math, but not advanced math. If you want
to review the material that we think is
prerequisite for the material in this
course, you can do a quick review by
looking at sections 1.1 and 1.2 of the
book. Either at the book site or in the
text book. If you want an in depth review,
we have a full text book called, An
Introduction to Programming in Java: An
Interdisciplinary Approach. There is a
book site and text book as well. But, the
bottom line is, you should be able t o
program, and the quick exercise to get
ready is, to write a java program on your
computer perhaps using a programming
model, as described on the book site. We
will provide much more detail information
on that as we get into the assignments.
You can use your own programming
environment if your comfortable with one
or you download ours. We have instructions
on the web on how to do that.